---
layout: sublesson
structurehead: Excel
group: databasics
nest: nonest
title: "Activity: Doing Math with Functions"
abstract: "This lesson builds on the previous lesson on doing simple math in Excel, by showing how functions can automate math equations."
lessonnumber: 5
lessonprint:
permalink: /lessons/DB/excel/5
nest: nonest
previouslesson: /lessons/DB/excel/4
nextlesson: /lessons/DB/excel/6
split: none
authors: spurcell
---

Finally, let’s add all of these numbers together. Instead of using symbols as we might for doing a handwritten equation, we can instead have Excel do the math using a {% include term.html term="function" %}.   

{% include definition.html term="Function" definition="A function here refers to a predesigned operation that Excel can run in a cell (or multiple cells) as long as it recognizes the proper inputs." %} 

The first function we will learn is one that can add multiple cells together, the SUM function. 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel_Maths7.jpg" alt="Looking at Excel’s text entry area, '=sum' is typed in the area. A dropdown menu, has examples of other functions that use that 'sum' letter combination: . . . 'SUM', 'SUMIF', 'SUMIFS', . . . and so on." caption="When you add any text after an equal sign in the text entry area, you will get an autofill function with functions sharing that text. This can make adding new functions faster. This view will also share information about formatting your function, based on the function’s presets." %} 

When you enter an equals sign (=) in a cell, and start typing in the data entry box, the program will start autofilling potential functions that match the typed {% include term.html term="string" %} of characters. This autofill function is helpful because it has a short cheat sheet for how Excel needs the data formatted to work. SUM reads like this: 

<div “backsplash">SUM(number1,[number2],…)</div> 

We can enter in cells manually. So for the subtotal we could write out: 

<div “backsplash">=sum(F2,F3,F4,F5,F6,F7,F8,F9,F10,F11)</div> 

Or we can write it out as multiple cells at a time 

<div “backsplash">=sum(F2:F11)</div> 

This will give the same output. For my math it read as “8785". Yours might be a little different depending on the amounts you chose for each item. 

Do the same for the H, “Total", column. 

Here is our result 

{% include spoiler.html title="Check Your Work" image="/assets/img/ Excel_Maths8.jpg" alt="Looking at the full completed spreadsheet. A sum equation, '=SUM(H2:H11)' has been added to both the F and H columns, resulting in a final sum for both." answer="We typed out =SUM(H2:H11) and got a total of 9399.95. Your result might be different if you filled in different numbers for your amounts in a previous exercise." %} 

Finally, we know this is all money—specifically American dollars—so we should format it to follow that. 

Select the cells in the Subtotal and Total columns, and press the $ button in the Home, Number interface. This interface is especially helpful if you have numbers that are running into multiple decimal places, or if Excel keeps changing your numbers into dates. 

Your final EquationsWorksheet should look something like this. 

{% include spoiler.html title="Check Your Work" image="/assets/img/ Excel8.jpg" alt="The same sum equation has been added to both the F and H columns, and both columns now have been formatted for American dollars." answer="Changing number format can be a way to address other issues in Excel, including the pesky setting that adjusts fractions to calendar dates." %} 

What you should take away from this first exercise is that Excel has a number of functions which are unlocked by typing an equal sign “=" at the beginning of a cell. There are dozens of different functions which this lesson will not be able to cover. We will, however, teach a few functions related to file naming, data organization, and other humanistic uses of Excel. 