---
layout: sublesson
structurehead: Excel
group: databasics
nest: nonest
title: "Activity: Doing Simple Math in Excel"
abstract: "In this lesson you will learn about the ways Excel does math, developing the fundamental skills to use functions later in this module."
lessonnumber: 4
lessonprint:
permalink: /lessons/DB/excel/3
nest: nonest
nextlesson: /lessons/DB/excel/4
split: none
authors: spurcell
---

<div class="backsplash">For this exercise, you will need to download the Excel Learning Workbook it can be accessed within the GitHub Resources Folder.</div> 

When you open the Excel Learning Workbook, you will want to navigate to the EquationsWorksheet sheet in the file. Each workbook can be comprised of many unique {% include term.html term="Excel sheets" %}, which can be used to hold different kinds of data, different structured data, and reference information for formulas and equations. To access the EquationsWorksheet, you may need to use the arrows at the bottom of the interface to scroll through the many different sheets in the workbook.  

{% include definition.html term="Sheets in Excel" definition="A sheet is a unique single-page spreadsheet that is part of a larger collection of spreadsheets. They can be accessed at the bottom left side of the Excel interface." %} 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel21_captions.jpg" alt="A figure showing how to navigate Excel pages. An arrow pointing to the bottom left corner, where there are two arrows ‘<’ and ‘>’ with a box labelled 'Navigate Using These Arrows'. A second arrow points to the different sheets on the workbook with a box labelled 'The Different Sheets Can be Found Here''" caption="The sheet navigation function can be found at the bottom of the Excel interface. You can navigate with the two arrows in the bottom left corner of the interface." %} 

This first worksheet in our workbook is a mockup budget for a wedding. 

We are going to use a budget in this first lesson because Excel is great at doing math. It is a program that is regularly used for accounting in many fields. In addition to this, {% include term.html term="Excel function" %}s are designed in the form of an equation, where the functions result in a final result at the other end of an equal sign (=).  

{% include definition.html term="Functions in Excel" definition="Functions in Excel are pre-programmed processes that allow users to do complex match, data analytics, and data transformation in their workbooks. These functions often take structured inputs—in the form of numerical data, strings, or data from one or more cells—and output new information into the cell containing the function based on those inputs. They can use used to automate data throughout your spreadsheets." %} 

This equation-structured logic guides most of Excel’s programmatic properties, so we will learn the basics by doing simple math (addition and multiplication) in excel. 

Start by clicking on the D2 cell in the EquationsWorksheet sheet in the workbook. When you do you’ll notice that the type interface above the cell will correspond to the number in that cell. “5000", as it appears in the cell, also reads as “5000" in the interface above. 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel_Maths1.jpg" alt=" An Excel spreadsheet with a budget. The cell D2 is selected and reads ‘5000’." caption=" The cell D2 has a number—’5000’—as its input" %} 

Figure 2. The cell D2 has a number input into it: “5000". Caption: An Excel spreadsheet with a budget. The cell D2 is selected and reads “5000". 

Now click on the F2 cell. This is different. Can you spot the difference? 

{% include spoiler.html title="Spot the Difference" image="/assets/img/ Excel_Maths2.jpg" alt="An Excel spreadsheet with a budget. The cell F2 is selected and reads '=D2*E2'. The corresponding cell in the spreadsheet reads as ‘5000’." answer="While the cell in the spreadsheet reads ‘5000’, the information in the input viewer reads as ‘=D2*E2’.</br><br>This difference is that this cell is outputting the result of an equation, which we see in the broader spreadhseet view." %} 

This F2 cell is operating as an {% include term.html term="Excel functions" %}. The program recognizes this {% include term.html term="string" %} of text as a function, because it starts with an equal sign (=). This formatting unlocks dozens of programmatic tools for analyzing and processing data in Excel. The later lessons will teach a few different approaches to transforming textual data with the use of the functions LEFT, SUBSTITUTE, and CONCATENATE. 

The equation in F2 works by referencing two different cells, and then multiplying them—as demarcated by the asterisk, “*". This line of code functions like this    =[firstcellreferenced]*[secondcellreferenced] 

Let’s try to copy that in the next cell down, F3. You’ll want to reference the D3 and E3 cells, so it would be written as follows:    =D3*E3 

{% include spoiler.html title="Check Your Work" image="/assets/img/ Excel_Maths3.jpg" alt="An Excel spreadsheet with a budget. The cell F3 is selected and reads '=D3*E3'. The corresponding cell in the spreadsheet reads as '1800'" answer=" You should get the following number from this equation: '1800'." %} 

What you’ll notice is that this spreadsheet is formatted to allow equations to be generated using data in each row. We can automate this kind of equation by clicking in the bottom right corner of the cell we are working in, and dragging the cell down. 

[[!!!MakeGIF] 

Try autofilling the cells F4:F11. 

{% include spoiler.html title="Check Your Work" image="/assets/img/ Excel_Maths4.jpg" alt="An Excel spreadsheet with a budget. This is the result of autofilling a number of cells with the multiplication formula from before '=D3*E3'. Many cells now read as '0' because they lack a number in the E column." answer="The autofill copies the equation down, but you may notice that our blank cells are being read as ‘0’." %} 

You’ll notice that the blank cells are being added to the equation as 0. Try entering some numbers to fill the amount.  

<div class="backsplash"><strong>Note:</strong> there is information about attendees on the right and number of items in each package in the notes column. If you want to match the number to the corresponding attendees, you can!).</div> 

{% include spoiler.html title="Check Your Work" image="/assets/img/ Excel_Maths5.jpg" alt="An Excel spreadsheet with a budget with numbers added to the blank cells from before. " answer="As you change the numbers in the ‘E’ column, you’ll notice they automatically change the equation result in the ‘F’ column." %} 

As you enter the numbers, you should notice the subtotal change. 

Using the same skills you’ve learned try completing the taxes information. (It should all read .07) and multiplying it to include the total. (H2 has the equation for adding taxes already in the cell.) 

{% include spoiler.html title="Check Your Work" image="/assets/img/ Excel_Maths7.jpg" alt="The same Excel spreadsheet from with a budget with preset numbers--'.07'--added to the 'Taxes' column, column G. Column H--'Total'--generates a final total by multiplying column F with column G. For example, F2 equals '5000', G2 equals '.07', resulting in H2 equaling '5350'." answer="An important thing to know, is that Excel will follow the PEMDAS (parentheses, exponents, multiplication and division, and addition and subtraction) order of operations order. The equation reads '=(F2*G2)+F2'. <br><br>To do the math it would process this equation in the following order:<ol><li> First translates the input cells to numbers: =(5000*.07)+5000</li><li>Then it does the first order of operations (in parentheses) =350+5000</li><li> Then it does the addition = 5350</li></ol><br><br>Understanding this order allows you to write more complex equations, using numerical inputs in your spreadsheets." %} 