---
layout: sublesson
structurehead: Excel
group: databasics
nest: nonest
title: "Navigating Excel: Ribbons and Tabs"
abstract: "In this lesson you will learn about the Excel interface, and how to navigate it to access different tools and functions."
lessonnumber: 3
lessonprint:
permalink: /lessons/DB/excel/3
nest: nonest
previouslesson: /lessons/DB/excel/2
nextlesson: /lessons/DB/excel/4
split: none
authors: spurcell
---

There are many useful tools and functions that you can access through Excel’s many tabs and ribbons. We want you to be aware of a few different ribbons, ahead of the next lessons, as we will be using them, because they can be overwhelming or confusing for first time Excel users. 

Let’s click on two of the tabs in the top bar. Start with the **home tab**. 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel4_captions.jpg" alt="A diagram of the 'Home' ribbon. The text styling elements are highlighted with text that reads, 'This interface allows you to adjust the typography of your graph.' Next to this element is a pane that allows users to adjust number settings. A box highlights this section reading, 'This interface can change how Excel expresses number. (Which can be helpful if you keep entering numbers that get turned into dates!)'. One more element is highlighted in the ribbon: the buttons that format, add, or delete rows and columns. The highlight reads, 'This interface can make entering new lines and columns easier.'" caption="A diagram of the top ribbon in Excel." %} 

The Home tab has many different interfaces. What is most important in this bar are the typographic options, the number settings, and the ability to add new rows and columns. This tab in the top ribbon has the most general functions, and it looks very similar to the Home tab in Microsoft Word. You may spend a lot of time using this tab when you start using Excel, but there are a few other tabs that are worth being aware of: the Formulas, Data, and View tabs. 

The tab allows you to access information about different {% include term.html term="Excel formulas" %}, and the View tab helps you change the way users view the spreadsheet. We will not be going into detail about these ribbons in this lesson. 

Click on the Data tab. We will use some functions found in this tab later in this lesson. This ribbon includes some pre-defined functions that can help automate some otherwise time-consuming practices. 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel5_captions.jpg" alt="A screenshot of the Data tab in Excel. The A to Z buttons have been highlighted with a caption: 'This interface can be helpful in sorting your columns.' The Data Tools buttons have also been highlighted: 'This interface is used for many helpful functions, like automatically separating data into different columns, or making dropdown menus for data entry.'" caption="The Data tab can be used to access functions that are especially helpful for making it easier to process data. We will be using the ‘Text to Columns’ and ‘Data Validation’ tools later in this lesson." %} 

We will be using the data tab later in this lesson. Before we do that, we need to learn the basics of formulating and executing equations in Excel. 