---
layout: sublesson
structurehead: Excel
group: databasics
nest: nonest
title: "Understanding Textual Data"
abstract: "This lesson teaches about textual data and the use of the term 'string' in computational contexts."
lessonnumber: 6
lessonprint:
permalink: /lessons/DB/excel/6
nest: nonest
previouslesson: /lessons/DB/excel/5
nextlesson: /lessons/DB/excel/7
split: none
authors: spurcell
---

Now that you have some experience working with Excel’s formula system, let’s apply it in a digital humanities context. 

What we will do in the next lessons is learn how to manipulate textual information—text {% include term.html term="strings" %}—so that it is easier to use and process. We will be doing an activity to shape our textual data into an autofilling function that allows for uniform file naming.[^1] We will first learn about and use the CONCATENATE function, learn about some of its limitations, and learn a few other functions—SUBSTITUTE and LEFT—to shape our data. 

All of the functions we are going to learn are especially useful for manipulating {% include term.html term="strings" %}. This term, string, is used in computational and programmatic processes to refer to information that is not useful for doing math-based calculations. For our purpose, we will be using the term to describe textual information, and specifically information that is not uniform in terms of its character length or its content. 

{% include definition.html term="String" definition="Text strings, or just ‘strings’, are type of data that is processed computationally, but which are not usable for certain math-centered functions. **This is very important for some kinds of programming, but not too important for this lesson.** Most simply a ‘string’ is a collection of data which cannot be used for math, but can be used in all sorts of ways. For example, 'Testing' might be a string, but if we were to create an equation with that string, '=1+testing', the computer would be unable to compute it." %} 

We are learning these processes because they will give you a sense of some of the ways Excel can process textual data. We want to show you how a researcher may need to manipulate their materials to make it work within a computational context. In addition to this, we also want to ground this work using frameworks which you may already be familiar, while also showing how these principles may be quickly applied to a new digital research project.  

--- 

[^1]: We are using this example because it is important to create uniform file naming conventions in your projects. This concatenate function can help automate parts of that otherwise tedious work. 