---
layout: sublesson
structurehead: Excel
group: databasics
nest: nonest
title: "Navigating Excel"
abstract: "In this lesson you will learn about the Excel interface, and how to navigate it to access different tools and functions."
lessonnumber: 2
lessonprint:
permalink: /lessons/DB/excel/2
nest: nonest
previouslesson: /lessons/DB/excel/1
nextlesson: /lessons/DB/excel/3
split: none
authors: spurcell
---

<div class="backsplash"><strong> **If you are experienced with Microsoft Excel, feel free to skip to the next section.**</strong><br><br> 

Also, this lesson will use the Windows version of Microsoft Excel. There are some minor interface differences between the version used in Windows and the one for Mac computers. All of the functions are the same.</div> 

When you open Excel, you’ll be greeted with a screen with many options, including templates and your previous projects. (We will be using a premade workbook later in this lesson, but for now, we want to show you what Excel looks like when you are just starting a project.) 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel2.jpg" alt="A screenshot of Microsoft Excel when it is first opened. There is a column on the left to navigate to create a new workbook or open an old project. The top row has tutorials for users to click on, and the bottom column has links to recently opened projects." caption="A screenshot of Microsoft Excel, when you first open it. This interface allows you to access old projects and also generate new workbooks." %} 

Once you have opened Excel, click the blank workbook. 

When you create a blank workbook you will come across an interface that looks like this. 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel3_captions.jpg" alt="A diagram showing the Microsoft Excel interface. The top ribbon has a box describing it 'This interface accesses many other interfaces for managing your spreadsheet.' Below this ribbon is a text entry box, described as follows: 'This interface is used to enter data into cells.' The rest of Excel’s cells have been highlighted. 'This is your spreadsheet. Each rectangle (a cell) in the sheet is its own unique data point. The cells are arranged by coordinates, based on their column and number.' Finally, a single cell is highlighted: 'This cell would be notated as E15.' " caption="A diagram of a blank workbook in the Windows version of Microsoft Excel. The Mac interface is very similar, with the only major difference being the ability to navigate to features using the operating system’s top bar." %} 

A few elements to note about this interface: The first element is the top bar, which allows you to access many different interfaces in the program. We will describe the top bar as having multiple **tabs**, similar to the kind of tabs you might find when working with physical files in a physical filing cabinet. Each of these tabs, when you click on them, gives you access to a unique **ribbon**, which has buttons for various functions. The ribbon you will probably use most often is for the **Home Tab**, and this ribbon has font formatting functions, as well as a few simple data processing and organizational tools.  

<div class="backsplash"><strong>Important:</strong> There is a setting in Microsoft Excel to pin or unpin the ribbon in view. If you cannot see it, there is a small carrot (^) in the bottom left of the ribbon, that, when you click on the tab, allows you to adjust different view settings.</div> 

We will go into more detail about the different ribbons later in this section. First, we want to walk you through the rest of the data entry elements of the Excel interface. 

Below the navigation tabs and ribbon is a text entry interface that allows you to enter text into your {% include term.html term="cells" %}, and below that is the spreadsheet itself. 

{% include definition.html term="Excel Cells" definition="Cells are the different data entry points across your spreadsheet. They are demarcated through an annotation system that places them in a column and a row. They are written as [ColumnLetter][RowNumber]. Multiple cells are notated using the same format with a colon between, written as [ColumnLetter][RowNumber]:[ColumnLetter][RowNumber]. C2:D5 would include every C cell between C2 and C5 and every D cell between D2 and D5." %} 

The text bar has a few buttons that are not too important for beginners, but which we are going to flag in this introduction. There is a navigation panel, showing you what cell you are revising. Next to that are three buttons: an ‘X’ that cancels the change you input, a check mark that confirms any changes in the text box, and an “fx” dropdown menu that opens the “insert function” interface. This last button can be useful if you want to add formulas into your spreadsheet. We will not be using any of these three buttons for this tutorial. 

To the right of these buttons is the text entry field, where you can write lines of texts, formulas, or input numbers. 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Excel20_Captions.jpg" alt="A diagram describing the buttons and fields of the entry bar in Microsoft Excel. 'Cell Navigation' points to the defined cell that is being edited. ‘Cancel and Confirm Buttons' points to the ‘X’ and checkmark buttons. Next to those, 'Insert Function' points to the 'fx' button. And 'Text Entry Box' points to the box where text can be entered and changed." caption="This bar is the main place where you will revise cell data and the formulas that process that data." %} 