---
layout: sublesson
structurehead: Excel
group: databasics
nest: nonest
title: "Introduction to Tabular Data"
abstract: "In this lesson you will learn about tabular data structure and how it is used in simple, text-based data frameworks like those used by citation managers."
lessonnumber: 1
lessonprint:
permalink: /lessons/DB/excel/1
nest: nonest
nextlesson: /lessons/DB/excel/2
split: none
authors: spurcell
---

Many different tools and programs in the digital health humanities use organized, structured collections of data known as {% include term.html term="tabular data" %}. Tabular data refers to a data structure in which where unique objects are classified within a predetermined data schema. Every object (often the horizontal lines in a tabular data sheet) has information that corresponds to defined categories (the columns in the same sheet). This uniformity, as well as the ability to demarcate every unique piece of data, makes tabular data especially useful for computational tools to access and analyze. 

{% include definition.html term="Tabular Data" definition="Tabular data refers to a collection of specific information in which every piece of information is described using pre-defined categories and can be mapped into a table. Every data point has a unique coordinate, and every column and row is formatted to be unified by a specific characteristic." %} 

Here is an example of tabular data. Each individual person corresponds to a row, and the rows are filled with data that matches the expected data types for each column. 

|Name (Last)|Name (First)|DOB|Affiliation| 
|Doe|Jane|01/31/1960|UCSF| 
|Smith|John|05/04/1978|UCSB| 
|Smythe|Jessica|09/01/1989|No Affiliation| 
|||||

Tabular data is useful for computational tools and technologies is because it is often quite rigid and uniform, making it easy to programmatically access and process. It is also quite flexible, allowing for any category to be included, so long as it can be uniformly described throughout the spreadsheet. 

Most digital humanities tools use tabular datasets, even if they do not appear as tables in their interfaces. Let’s look at something simple, the citation manager Zotero, to see how it works with tabular data to generate works cited. Here is a citation that has been entered into the program: 

{% include imgwithcaption.html filepath="/assets/img/Workflow_Revised8.JPG" alt="A screenshot of a Zotero citation. The specific citation is a 'Book Section'. Title: 'Digital Health Humanities'. Author: 'Ostherr, Kirsten'. Editors 'Klugmann, Craig M.' and 'Lamb, Erin Gentry'. Book Title: 'Research Methods in Health Humanities'. Place: 'Oxford & New York'. Publisher: 'Oxford University Press'. Date: '2019'. Pages: '182-198'. All of the other citation categories—Series, Series Number, Volume and so on—are left blank." caption="An example Zotero entry. A citation manager, Zotero has many potential input fields, allowing for uses that include both the generation of citations, as well as space to make notes about a specific source." %} 

When you input a citation into the program, you are in entering them into a collection of data that the program is built to display and process. Once you make the item in Zotero, the program places the data into its own internal tabular structure, which it then can organize based on the title, year published, author, and so on. In Excel this same input may read something like this. 

|Title|Author|Editor|Book Title|Place|Publisher|Date|Pages| 
|Digital Health Humanities|Ostherr, Kirsten| Klugmann, Craig M.; Lamb, Erin Gentry|Research Methods in Health Humanities|Oxford & New York|Oxford University Press|2019|182-198| 
||||||||

By taking this information about information—also known as {% include term.html term="metadata" %}—the citation manager is able to output the item in different ways, following the protocols of an academic style guide. 

{% include definition.html term="Metadata" definition="Metadata refers to information about information, and it is a pillar of the library sciences. Metadata helps make sense of files, objects, or born-digital materials by describing important information—like author, publishing date, or publisher for a book—which can then be used to organize multiple objects in relation to each other." %} 

With this data, structured as it is, Zotero can rearrange it to match the guidelines outlined in the Chicago Manual of Style: 

<div class="backsplash">Ostherr, Kirsten. “Digital Health Humanities.” In Research Methods in Health Humanities, edited by Craig M. Klugmann and Erin Gentry Lamb, 182–98. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press, 2019.</div>

Or the American Psychological Association’s (APA) citation format: 

<div class="backsplash">Ostherr, K. (2019). Digital Health Humanities. In C. M. Klugmann & E. G. Lamb (Eds.), Research Methods in Health Humanities (pp. 182–198). Oxford University Press.</div>

The way it generates this entry is by taking the data from its structured data input categories and places them into a preset, programmed output. 

For the Chicago Manual of Style it is referencing the tabular data like this:   

    [Author First] [Author Last]. “[Title].” In [Book Title], [Editor First] [Editor Last], [pages]. [Place]: [Publisher], [Year]. 

The citation manager has been programmed to generate this because it is using a rigid collection of pre-defined data. All of the data follows the same protocols, and because of this it is simple enough to take the inputs and arrange them as defined by an academic style manual. Importantly, it is able to take any and every citation that is entered into it and output them into whatever order is necessary to follow the necessary style. Because the information is in this tabular form, with individual definitions that can be arranged and processed as needed, Zotero is able to transform that information at scale. 

This is a relatively simple example, but the same principle applies for all sorts of digital programs: Gephi—a network graphing software—is essentially a set of interlinked tables; ArcGIS operates by tying geocoordinates to specific identifiers. **Almost every digital tool has some aspect of tabular data operating under the hood.** 

For digital humanists, this is important on a conceptual level, but much more important on a practical level. It means that we can prepare our data outside the programs in which we are working. This helps us for a couple reasons: 

1. We can work around the often clunky and unintuitive interfaces that can make some digital programs onerous to use.  

2. We can produce data sets that can be organized based on different programmatic needs, and output structured materials at scale. 

3. We can move the data between programs more easily. 

This lesson will teach you three things: First, you will learn some of the basics of how formulas work in Excel and other tabular software platforms. Second, you will get some examples for how these programs can help organize humanistic data. Finally, you will learn some of the basics regarding different tabular data files, and how they can be applied in different digital humanities methods. 